---
title: "POPL Practice Talks"
speaker: "PLClub Members"
semester: "SP20"
---

[Talks]

   1) Interaction Trees: Representing Recursive and Impure Programs in Coq
       Presenter: Li-yao Xia
       Time: 12:30pm - 1pm

       Abstract:

  Interaction trees (ITrees) are a general-purpose data structure in Coq  
  for representing the behaviors of recursive programs that interact with
  their environments. ITrees, a coinductive variant of "free monads,'' are
  built out of uninterpreted events and their continuations. They support
  compositional construction of interpreters from event handlers, which
  give meaning to events by defining their semantics as monadic actions.
  They are expressive enough to represent impure and potentially
  nonterminating, mutually recursive computations in Coq. And they give
  rise to a theory enabling equational reasoning, up to weak bisimulation,
  about ITrees and monadic computations built from them. In contrast to
  other approaches such as relationally specified operational semantics,
  ITrees are executable via code extraction, making them suitable for
  debugging, testing, and implementing software artifacts that are
  amenable to formal verification.

  We have implemented ITrees and their associated theory as a Coq library, 
  which mechanizes classic domain- and category-theoretic results about
  program semantics, iteration, monadic structures, and equational
  reasoning. Although the internals of the library make heavy use of
  coinductive proofs, the interface hides these details so that clients
  can use and reason about ITrees without explicit use of Coq’s
  coinduction tactics.

  To demonstrate the utility of our theory, we prove the
  termination-sensitive correctness of a compiler from a simple imperative
  source language to an assembly-like target whose meanings are given as
  ITree-based denotational semantics. Unlike previous results using
  operational techniques, this bisimulation proof follows
  straightforwardly by structural induction and elementary rewriting via
  an equational theory of combinators for control-flow graphs.

    2) An Equational Theory for Weak Bisimulation via Generalized Parameterized Coinduction
        Presenter: Yannick Zakowski
        Time: 1pm - 1:30pm

        Abstract:

  Coinductive reasoning about infinitary structures such as streams is widely
  applicable.  However, practical frameworks for developing coinductive proofs
  and finding reasoning principles that help structure such proofs remain a
  challenge, especially in the context of machine-checked formalization.

  This paper gives a novel presentation of an equational theory for reasoning
  about structures up to weak bisimulation.  The theory is both compositional,
  making it suitable for defining general-purpose lemmas, and also incremental,
  meaning that the bisimulation can be created interactively.
  To prove the theory's soundness, this paper also introduces
  generalized parameterized coinduction, which addresses expressivity
  problems of earlier works and provides a practical framework for coinductive
  reasoning.  The paper presents the resulting equational theory for streams,
  but the technique applies to other structures too.

  All of the results in this paper have been proved in Coq, and the generalized
  parameterized coinduction framework is available as a Coq library.

[SRC posters]
Time: 1pm - 1:30pm

    3) Combinatorial Testing for Algebraic Data Types
        Presenter: Harry Goldstein
Combinatorial or “t-way” testing provides a principled way of testing the possible behaviors of a system. While this approach is well studied for systems that operate on simple input parameters, there has been relatively little exploration of its use for more complex structured data. We propose a definition of t-way testing that is generalized to algebraic data types, including recursive types. We define combinatorial coverage using regular tree expressions as descriptions of tests, and we provide a sketch of an algorithm for generating covering test sets that are guaranteed to catch certain classes of bugs. This abstract presents work in progress.

     4) Through the Interaction Forest: Modeling Concurrency in Coq with Interaction Trees
         Presenter: Irene Yoon
How do we specify concurrent programs? In the presence of concurrency, programs must be viewed as components that interact with their environment. This intuition has developed into bisimulation, an observational equational theory for reasoning about concurrent programs. Interaction Trees(ITrees) represent impure and recursive programs in Coq. In essence, it is a coinductive variant of a free monad. Its free monadic structure provide a modular method of reasoning about effects. Coinduction allows ITrees to represent recursive programs as infinite data structures and sets ground to a straightforward application of bisimulation. Weak bisimulation, a method of encapsulating internal interactions within a component, observes behavioral equivalence of ITrees. This equational theory serves as a clean, modular proof technique for equating impure, recursive programs. A natural extension of Interaction Trees, then, is to use its bisimilarity proof techniques for reasoning about concurrent programs in Coq. In this extended abstract, we present a preliminary model of concurrent, and possibly interleaving Interaction Trees.
